The Indian Premier League (IPL), also known as the TATA IPL for sponsorship reasons, is a men's Twenty20 (T20) cricket league held annually in India. Founded by the BCCI (the Board of Control for Cricket in India) in 2007, the league features ten state or city-based franchise teams. Most popular and biggest cricket league, it usually takes place during the summer for 2 months, between March and May each year. It has an exclusive window in the ICC Future Tours Programme, resulting in fewer international cricket tours occurring during the IPL seasons.

In 2014, it ranked sixth in average attendance among all sports leagues. In 2010, the IPL became the first sporting event to be broadcast live on YouTube. Inspired by the success of the IPL, other Indian sports leagues have been established.[a] In 2022, the league's brand value was estimated at ₹90,038 crore (US$11 billion). According to the BCCI, the 2015 IPL season contributed ₹1,150 crore (US$140 million) to India's GDP. In December 2022, the IPL achieved a valuation of US$10.9 billion, becoming a decacorn and registering a 75% growth in dollar terms since 2020 when it was valued at $6.2 billion, according to a report by the consulting firm D and P Advisory. Its 2023 final became the most streamed live event on the internet, with 32 million viewers.

In 2023, the league sold its media rights for the next 4 seasons for US$6.4 billion to Viacom18 and Star Sports, meaning each IPL match was valued at $13.4 million. As of 2024, there have been seventeen seasons of the tournament. The current champions are the Kolkata Knight Riders, who won the 2024 season after defeating the Sunrisers Hyderabad in the final.

In 2007, Zee Entertainment Enterprises founded the Indian Cricket League (ICL). The ICL was not recognized by the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) or the International Cricket Council (ICC). Moreover, the BCCI was unhappy about its committee members joining the ICL executive board. In response, the BCCI increased the prize money for its domestic tournaments and imposed lifetime bans on players who joined the rival league, which it considered a rebel league.

On 13 September 2007, following India's victory at the 2007 T20 World Cup, the BCCI announced a franchise based Twenty20 cricket competition known as the Indian Premier League. The inaugural season was scheduled to start in April 2008, commencing with a "high-profile ceremony" in New Delhi. BCCI Vice-president Lalit Modi, who led the IPL initiative, provided details of the tournament, including its format, prize money, franchise revenue system, and squad composition rules. The league, to be managed by a seven-man governing council, would also serve as the qualifying mechanism for that year's Champions League Twenty20.

To determine team ownership, an auction for the franchises was held on 24 January 2008. The reserve prices for the eight franchises totalled $400 million, but the auction ultimately raised $723.59 million. The league officially commenced in April 2008, featuring Chennai Super Kings (CSK), Mumbai Indians (MI), Delhi Daredevils (DD), Kings XI Punjab (KXIP), Deccan Chargers (DC), Rajasthan Royals (RR), Kolkata Knight Riders (KKR), and Royal Challengers Bangalore (RCB).


Following the ban on players who chose to participate in the ICL, the rival league shut down in 2009.
New franchises, Pune Warriors India and Kochi Tuskers Kerala, joined the league before the fourth season in 2011. The Sahara Adventure Sports Group purchased the Pune franchise for $370 million, while Rendezvous Sports World bought the Kochi franchise for $333.3 million. The Kochi franchise was terminated after just one season due to their failure to pay the BCCI the 10% bank guarantee element of the franchise fee.

In September 2012, the Deccan Chargers franchise agreement was terminated after the BCCI failed to find new owners. In October, an auction was held for a replacement franchise; Sun TV Network won the bid for what became the Hyderabad franchise; the team was named Sunrisers Hyderabad.

Pune Warriors India withdrew from the IPL in May 2013 due to financial differences with the BCCI. The BCCI officially terminated the franchise in October, and the league reverted to eight teams.

In June 2015, the two-time champions Chennai Super Kings and the inaugural season champions Rajasthan Royals were suspended for two seasons following their involvement in a spot-fixing and betting scandal. The two teams were replaced for two seasons by franchises based in Pune and Rajkot.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the venue for the 2020 season was moved and games were played in the United Arab Emirates. In August 2021, the BCCI announced that two new franchises, based in two of six shortlisted cities, would join the league in the 2022 season. In closed bidding held in October, the RPSG Group and CVC Capital won the bids for the teams, paying ₹7,000 crore (US$840 million) and ₹5,200 crore (US$620 million), respectively. The teams were subsequently named Lucknow Super Giants and Gujarat Titans.

Several IPL franchise owners have expanded their business by acquiring teams in other franchise leagues, such as the Caribbean Premier League (CPL), South Africa's SA20, the UAE's International League T20 (ILT) and the USA's Major League Cricket (MLC). These teams have been branded with similar names to their parent IPL franchises.

In addition to the above acquisitions, Delhi Capitals also bought a stake in MLC's Seattle Orcas.

The IPL's headquarters are located in the Cricket Centre, next to the Wankhede Stadium in Churchgate, Mumbai. The Governing Council is responsible for the league's functions, including the organization of tournaments. As of April 2023[update], its members included:

A team can acquire players through the annual player auction, trading with other teams during trading windows, and signing replacements for unavailable players. Players sign up for the auction and set their base price and are bought by the highest-bidding franchise. Unsold players at the auction can become replacement signings. Trades require player consent, and any contract differences are covered by the franchise. There are typically three trading windows: two before the auction and one before the tournament. No trading is allowed outside these windows or during the tournament, but replacements can be signed before or during the event.

Other notable rules, as of the 2024 season, include:

Player contracts run for one year but can be extended by one or two years if the franchises take up the option. Since the 2014 season, player contracts have been denominated in the Indian rupee, before which the contracts were in the US dollar. Overseas players can be remunerated in the currency of the player's choice, at the exchange rate on either the contract due date or the actual payment date. Before the 2014 season, Indian domestic players were not included in the player auction pool. They could be signed up by franchises at a discrete amount while a fixed sum of ₹10 lakh (US$12,000) to ₹30 lakh (US$36,000) would be deducted per signing from the franchise's salary purse. This received significant opposition from franchise owners, who complained richer franchises were "luring players with under-the-table deals." The IPL later decided to include domestic players in the player auction.

The BCCI give 10% of foreign players' salaries to their country's national cricket board.

Based on a 2024 report by Forbes India, the average IPL salary among the top 10 highest-paid players is ₹12.37 crore, the second-highest of sports leagues in the world. Because players in the IPL are contracted only for the duration of the tournament – less than two months – the weekly IPL salaries are extrapolated pro data to obtain an average annual salary, unlike other sports leagues in which players are contracted by a single team for the entire year.

According to a report by The Telegraph, IPL players are paid 18% of the revenue, which is the lowest amount compared to other major sports leagues, in which players receive at least 50% of the revenue. The Federation of International Cricketers' Associations said that IPL players must be paid fairly.

The 2022 season of the IPL offered total prize money of ₹46.5 crore (equivalent to ₹49 crore or US$5.9 million in 2023), with the winning team netting ₹20 crore (equivalent to ₹21 crore or US$2.5 million in 2023) and the second-placed team ₹13 crore (equivalent to ₹14 crore or US$1.7 million in 2023). League rules mandate that half of any prize money must be distributed amongst the franchise's players.

The IPL has several rules which vary from the established Laws of cricket or those used in other Twenty20 (T20) leagues:

As of the 2024 season, the league has ten teams based in cities across India.

Present teams Former teams
Suspended

Chennai Super Kings and Mumbai Indians have each won five titles, the most in the tournament. Kolkata Knight Riders have won three titles, while Rajasthan Royals, Deccan Chargers, Sunrisers Hyderabad and Gujarat Titans have each won a single title.

The reigning champions are the Kolkata Knight Riders, who defeated the Sunrisers Hyderabad by eight wickets in the 2024 IPL final to secure their third title.

† Team now defunct

† Team now defunct

This section shows records from the league stage only (i.e. excluding playoffs & finals) from 2008–2024. Stats are correct as of conclusion of league stage of IPL 2024.

A summary of the most notable statistical records associated with the tournament is provided below:

The Orange Cap is awarded to the highest run-scorer at the end of each season. It is an ongoing competition with the current highest-run scorer wearing the cap whilst fielding. The eventual winner keeps the cap for the season. Brendon McCullum was the first player to wear the Orange Cap and Shaun Marsh the inaugural winner of the award. Australian batsman David Warner has won the award three times, more than any other player. Virat Kohli of Royal Challengers Bengaluru, who scored 741 runs during the 2024 season, is the most recent winner of the award.

The Purple Cap is awarded to the highest wicket-taker at the end of each season. It is an ongoing competition and the bowler who is the leading wicket-taker wears a purple cap whilst fielding. The eventual winner keeps the cap for the season. Bhuvneshwar Kumar and Dwayne Bravo are the only players to have won the award twice. Harshal Patel of Punjab Kings who took 24 wickets during the 2024 season, is the most recent winner of the award.

The Most Valuable Player award, formerly called the "Man of the Tournament" until the 2012 season, is awarded using a ratings system introduced in 2013. Sunil Narine won the award in 2024.

The Fair Play Award is given after each season to the team considered to have the best fair play record. After each match, the two on-field umpires and the third umpire score the performance of both teams, with the highest-scoring team at the end of the season receiving the award. The 2024 winners were Sunrisers Hyderabad.

The Emerging Player Award was presented to the best under-19 player in 2008 and the best under-23 player in 2009 and 2010. In 2011 and 2012, the award was known as "Rising Star of the Year," and in 2013 the "Best Young Player of the Season." Since 2014, the award has been called the Emerging Player of the Year. Mustafizur Rahman is the only foreign player to win this award. The 2024 winner was Nitish Kumar Reddy.

The Maximum Sixes Award is presented to the player who hits the most sixes at the end of the season.

From 2008 to 2012, the IPL title sponsor was DLF, India's largest real estate developer, which bid ₹200 crore (US$24 million) for the rights for five seasons. After the 2012 season, PepsiCo bought the title sponsorship rights for ₹397 crore (US$48 million) for the next five seasons but terminated the deal in October 2015, two years before the expiry of the contract, due to the two-season suspension of the Chennai and Rajasthan franchises from the league. The BCCI transferred the title sponsorship rights for the remaining two seasons of the contract to Chinese smartphone manufacturer Vivo for ₹200 crore (US$24 million).

In June 2017, Vivo retained the rights for the next five seasons from 2018 to 2022 with a winning bid of ₹2,199 crore (US$260 million). On 4 August 2020, Vivo canceled the title sponsorship rights due to the military stand-off between India and China at the Line of Actual Control in July 2020. The withdrawal was also a result of Vivo's market losses due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic; Vivo intended to return as the title sponsor for the following three years. Dream11 became the title sponsors for the 2020 IPL for an amount of ₹222 crore (equivalent to ₹261 crore or US$31 million in 2023). Vivo returned as the title sponsor for the 2021 IPL season but withdrew again, and was replaced by the Tata Group for the next two seasons. InsideSport reported the BCCI would receive ₹498 crore (US$60 million) for the 2022 and 2023 seasons from title sponsors. Vivo had previously agreed to pay a higher amount for the last two seasons of its sponsorship contract due to the league's expansion from the 2022 season. According to InsideSport, due to the new deal's structure, Tata would pay ₹335 crore (US$40 million) per year while Vivo would pay the deficit of ₹163 crore (US$20 million) per season.

Saudi Aramco brought the rights to advertise on the Purple and Orange caps in 2022.

The BCCI pays ten per cent of the auctioned value of players to their national cricket boards. In January 2018, IPL chairman Rajiv Shukla said the IPL would double the amount paid to cricket boards that made their players available for an entire season. In 2022, Australian Cricketers' Association expressed its unhappiness about this.

The IPL tournament rapidly grew in value between 2016 and 2018. Financial experts valued the IPL at US$4.16 billion in 2016; that number grew to $5.3 billion in 2017 and $6.13 billion in 2018. A report from Duff & Phelps said one of the contributing factors in the rapid growth of the IPL's value was a new television deal with Star India Private Limited, which engaged more viewers because the IPL was transmitted to regional channels in eight languages; under the previous deal, the transmissions were limited to sports networks with English-language commentary.


According to an independent report conducted by Brand Finance, a London-based company, after the conclusion of the 2017 Indian Premier League, the IPL's business value grew by 37% to an all-time peak of $5.3 billion, exceeding the five-billion-dollar mark for the first time in a season. According to the company's director Savio D'Souza:

Now in its 11th season, the Indian Premier League is here to stay. The league has delivered financially for the players, franchisees, sponsors, and India as a whole, prompting a strong desire among stakeholders to value it appropriately. To ensure continued development, management, and team owners must explore innovative ways of engaging fans, clubs, and sponsors.[relevant?]
In December 2022, the IPL became a decacorn valued at US$10.9 billion, registering a 75% growth in dollar terms since 2020 when it was valued at $6.2 billion, according to a report by consulting firm D & P Advisory.

In 2022, the BCCI took insurance of ₹5,000 crore (US$600 million) for the IPL. This insurance policy involves all stakeholders, including broadcasters, ancillary services providers, and sponsors. The BCCI is covered in the case of any revenue losses due to weather, riots, and other unforeseen events.

The next cycle of IPL media rights will last from 2023 to 2027 and will be put to auction. In this auction, the broadcasting rights were divided into four packages. Package A was for domestic television rights, and Package B was for domestic digital rights. Package C was for the digital rights of eighteen non-exclusive matches, and Package D was for international television and digital rights, further divided into four groups. On 13 June 2022, it was reported the packages for domestic television and streaming rights had fetched at least ₹397.75 billion (nearly US$5.1 billion) in total, doubling the value of the 2018–2022 contract.

The next day, it was announced that Star Sports had renewed its contract for television rights by winning package A, and that a Viacom18 consortium had exclusively acquired the streaming rights by winning both Package B and C. The two contracts for Package A and B are cumulatively valued at around US$6.2 billion; with the new contracts, the IPL overtook the Premier League in English football as the second highest-valued sports media property worldwide, behind only the NFL, whose new media contracts taking effect in the 2023 season cumulatively fetched US$111 billion.

In February 2023, Viacom18 announced it would stream the 2023 IPL for free on JioCinema with feeds in 12 languages, including English and regional languages, and in 4K resolution. The same month, The Walt Disney Company reported its loss of the IPL had contributed to a net loss of 2.4 million Disney+ subscribers worldwide, primarily in India.

Ahead of the 2023 IPL, Star launched HD feeds of Star Sports 1 in Tamil and Telugu and announced its free-to-air channel Star Utsav Movies would carry twelve matches. It was anticipated that viewership of Star Sports' broadcasts may not be heavily impacted by the Jio deal due to its existing market reach (including as rights holder of India's home matches) and viewers who preferred linear television due to being less familiar with over-the-top services, or concerns over technical issues associated with such services. JioCinema reported the IPL had 1.4 billion views on the service over the opening weekend, which was higher than the entirety of the 2022 season on Disney+ Hotstar. The 2023 final set a record for the most concurrent viewers of a livestreamed event, peaking at over 32 million viewers (surpassing a record of 25.3 million set by Hotstar during the 2019 Cricket World Cup).

In the 2012 IPL spot-fixing case, the BCCI gave a lifetime ban to Deccan Chargers player TP Sudhindra and suspended four other players. In a sting operation, Pune Warriors India player Mohnish Mishra was recorded stating that IPL franchise owners pay their players through black money. Mishra later apologized for his incorrect statement. On 20 May 2012, police detained Rahul Sharma and Wayne Parnell when they were caught during a raid at a rave party in a suburb of Mumbai; both the players denied taking drugs or drinking alcohol. However, it was later proven that in reality, they had taken banned drugs after police tested their urine and blood samples in a lab.

In the 2013 IPL spot-fixing and betting case, Delhi police arrested players Ajit Chandila, Ankeet Chavan and S. Sreesanth on allegations of spot-fixing; they received a lifetime ban from the BCCI. The police also arrested Gurunath Meiyappan, Chennai Super Kings' team principal and son-in-law of then BCCI president N. Srinivasan, for illegally betting on IPL matches and passing team information to bookmakers.

The Lodha Committee, appointed by the Supreme Court of India, banned Rajasthan Royals (RR) and Chennai Super Kings (CSK) for two years. CSK's team principal, Gurunath Meiyappan, was found guilty of betting and bringing the IPL and the game into disrepute. After this, the BCCI banned Meiyappan from involving in the game. Justice RM Lodha said that due to all this fixing-betting matter, the reputation of the game had been hurt quite grievously. "Disrepute has been brought to cricket, the BCCI and the IPL to such an extent that there are doubts abound in the public whether the game is clean or not," Justice Lodha said. He further elaborated on his committee's observations and said it had been proven beyond doubt that Meiyappan, CSK's team principal, was heavily involved in betting on his team.

In its 3rd season in 2010, the IPL administration brought a new rule: "strategic timeout" of seven minutes and fifty seconds duration in each inning. Franchises and Sachin Tendulkar disapproved of it. Many saw it as the BCCI's use of 'extended drinks break' to earn money; it faced widespread backlash. Then-IPL president said that the rule is intended to allow teams to make strategies during the game. Still, critics disagreed with this argument and said that the strategic timeout is a way to generate money. Later, the BCCI reduced its duration but still applied it.

These timeouts boost the IPL's revenue; every 10-second slot gets sold for ₹5 lakhs or more. Due to these timeouts, an IPL match halts four times for more than 10 minutes. As per Sunil Gavaskar, along with many other reasons, strategic timeouts delay the IPL matches, causing them to not end at the stipulated time of 3 hours and 10 minutes but rather after 4 hours. During the Super Giants versus Mumbai Indians eliminator game in 2023, he uttered on-air, "How many times batsmen get out after a strategic timeout," indicating that it plays a negative role in immediate fall of wickets by disrupting concentration of the batters.

Some cricketers have criticized strategic timeouts for interrupting the flow of play. In the past, it even faced Public Interest Litigation (PIL) with the possibility that ST breaks were being used by bookies to connect with players. In the past, IPL's stakeholders admitted that STs are unavoidable because they provide the BCCI and broadcasters with additional time for more ads. In 2013, after a spot-fixing matter, then-president N. Srinivasan got sacked due to a pending inquiry, and Jagmohan Dalmia got appointed as interim president. Dalmia expressed openly that he wants to end STs and take other measures to restrain malpractices in the IPL.

In the 2008 edition, after a game, Harbhajan Singh, who was playing for Mumbai Indians, slapped S. Sreesanth. The IPL fined and banned him from the remaining entire edition. However, years later, he apologized to Sreesanth for it on TV and said that he was ashamed for doing it.

In a 2022 interview, Yuzvendra Chahal revealed two incidents of physical harassment that happened with him while he was with Mumbai Indians. In 2013, at a party of the team in a building, a drunken teammate took him to the balcony, overpowered him and hung him from the 15th floor of the building. Yuzvendra said he narrowly survived that day. In another incident, two teammates, including Andrew Symonds, tied him up, gagged his mouth and threw him into a hotel room. He remained alone in that room the entire night. When the hotel room service arrived in the morning, they untied his hands and legs. He did not reveal the names of the offenders involved in the first incident. Reacting to these revelations, Virender Sehwag expressed that he wanted Yuzvendra to reveal the offender's name, and furious Ravi Shastri expressed that the offender should be banned.

In 2010, the BCCI banned Ravindra Jadeja from the IPL for one year after he violated the IPL guidelines by not signing a renewal contract with his team Rajasthan Royals, and instead negotiated a more lucrative contract with other teams through the back door.

In April 2010, the BCCI president Shashank Manohar said in a press conference that the IPL governing council didn't know who the owners of Rajasthan Royals (RR) and the Punjab team are. The initial bid for RR was made by a person named Manoj Bhandale. After that, other firms from Mauritius were added as shareholders. In response, Shilpa Shetty tweeted that she was a proprietor of RR. Regarding the Punjab team, Manohar revealed that in the team bidding event, only Preity Zinta was interested in buying that team. She said that she would form a firm. She did it and signed a bid agreement with the BCCI. However, Preity did not have a single share in her name in that firm. Manohar alleged that Shetty and Zinta violated the agreement as prior permission of the BCCI is mandatory before transferring ownership shares with other people.

In 2010, an e-mail leaked in Indian media, according to an Economic Times article, said that former IPL president Lalit Modi helped then-BCCI president N. Srinivasan to buy Andrew Flintoff in the auction for his team Chennai Super Kings (CSK). Srinivasan was criticized for owning an IPL team due to his conflict of interests. Former BCCI president A. Muthiah filed a lawsuit against Srinivasan in the Supreme Court of India; he claimed that Srinivasan altered the BCCI's rules to allow himself to purchase a team. The Lodha Committee banned CSK from the IPL for two years when their team principal, Gurunath Meiyappan, was found guilty of betting and providing inside information to bookies. The supreme court criticized Srinivasan for buying an IPL team while serving as the BCCI president; a judge commented, "How can a BCCI chief own a team?" However, he still owns the team and his daughter Rupa Gurunath often appears in stadiums during CSK's games.

Due to the BCCI giving one-tenth of foreign players' salaries to their respective countries' national cricket boards, a dispute between Australian cricketers and Cricket Australia started. The Australian Cricketers' Association also opposed the arrangement.

In 2010, the IPL president revealed that Sunanda Pushkar, wife of the Minister of State for External Affairs Shashi Tharoor, had sweat equity shares in Rendezvous Sports World (RSW), the proprietor of Kochi Tuskers Kerala. The opposition party BJP agitated against the Indian National Congress. Later, it was revealed that Pushkar had equity worth ₹70 crore in RSW. Tharoor offered to leave his equity, but many within the Congress party felt that by doing this, Tharoor pleaded guilty. Due to pressure, the Congress party demanded his resignation. He was the first minister of the United Progressive Alliance 2 who got slammed for his illegal moves.

The IPL frequently gets criticism due to the slow pace of its matches. During the 2023 season, Jos Buttler mentioned on Twitter the need to speed up the pace of play. An IPL match should end within 3 hours and 10 minutes of the stipulated time, but it often ends after 4 hours. As per Gavaskar, strategic timeouts, reserve players running on the field with drinks and messages during games, and batsmen asking for helmets result in these delays. The introduction of strategic timeouts was also suspected to be for monetary reasons since it allows for more ad slots. Field umpires sometimes penalize teams by restricting them to having only four fielders outside the 30-yard area, or match referees penalize captains and team members by reducing their match fees, but these measures have not solved the problem. Games often run at a slow speed and finish late. During the 2024 season, Rishabh Pant, captain of Delhi Capitals, and Shubman Gill of Gujarat Titans were fined ₹12 lakhs each for their teams' slow over rates during matches against Chennai Super Kings. Millions of viewers feel that IPL matches should be fast-paced.

Former India captain Kapil Dev claimed that there was an increasing risk of injury to Indian players from playing in the IPL. He felt that some players avoided the national team's matches but appeared in all of their IPL fixtures.

Following the November 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai by Pakistan based ISI sponsored terrorist group Lashkar-e-Taiba and the attack on Sri Lankan team in March 2009, geopolitical tensions surged between India and Pakistan. It led to several outcomes, including Pakistani players being unofficially forbidden to play in the IPL. While they had been selected by several teams for the inaugural IPL season (2008), their contracts were terminated before the 2009 edition. This situation endured "due to political tensions". Among the critics of the BCCI and IPL owners is Imran Khan, who has said they "take it out on Pakistan players". He accused the BCCI of "arrogance" but also stated that "Pakistan should not worry about it". Additionally, following the 2008 attack in Mumbai, India suspended all future engagements with Pakistan, and have refused to play any bilateral series or matches since then, with the exception of ICC events.  The Indian team has also refused to travel to Pakistan for the 2025 ICC Champions Trophy due to security concerns, which earlier surfaced during the 2023 Asia Cup which was hosted jointly by Pakistan and Sri Lanka. 

Due to the exclusion, many Pakistani players such as Sohail Tanvir and Shahid Afridi made disparaging comments against the mentality of India. Furthermore, many of them expressed disappointment about not getting an opportunity to be a part of the IPL. Additionally, following the 2008 attack in Mumbai, India suspended all future engagements with Pakistan and refused to play any bilateral series since then, with the exception of ICC events.